---
description: How to use Group By in MATLAB<sup>&reg;</sup> with Plotly.
name: Group By
display_as: transforms
order: 2
permalink: matlab/group-by/
thumnail_github: group-by.png
layout: base
language: matlab
page_type: u-guide
---

## Dataset Array Summary Statistics Organized by Group

Load the sample data. 

```{matlab}
load('hospital');
```

The dataset array `hospital` has 100 observations and 7 variables. 

Create a dataset array with only the variables `Sex`, `Age`, `Weight`, and `Smoker`. 

```{matlab}
load('hospital');

dsa = hospital(:,{'Sex','Age','Weight','Smoker'});
```

`Sex` is a nominal array, with levels `Male` and `Female`. The variables `Age` and `Weight` have numeric values, and `Smoker` has logical values.

Compute the mean for the numeric and logical arrays, `Age`, `Weight`, and `Smoker`, grouped by the levels in `Sex`. 

```{matlab}
load('hospital');

dsa = hospital(:,{'Sex','Age','Weight','Smoker'});

statarray = grpstats(dsa,'Sex')
```

`statarray` is a dataset array with two rows, corresponding to the levels in `Sex`. `GroupCount` is the number of observations in each group. The means of `Age`, `Weight`, and `Smoker`, grouped by `Sex`, are given in `mean_Age`, `mean_Weight`, and `mean_Smoker`.

Compute the mean for `Age` and `Weight`, grouped by the values in `Smoker`.

```{matlab}
load('hospital');

dsa = hospital(:,{'Sex','Age','Weight','Smoker'});

statarray = grpstats(dsa,'Smoker','mean','DataVars',{'Age','Weight'})
```


In this case, not all variables in `dsa` (excluding the grouping variable, `Smoker`) are numeric or logical arrays; the variable `Sex` is a nominal array. When not all variables in the input dataset array are numeric or logical arrays, you must specify the variables for which you want to calculate summary statistics using `DataVars`.

Compute the minimum and maximum weight, grouped by the combinations of values in `Sex` and `Smoker`. 

```{matlab}
load('hospital');

dsa = hospital(:,{'Sex','Age','Weight','Smoker'});

statarray = grpstats(dsa,{'Sex','Smoker'},{'min','max'},...
                     'DataVars','Weight')
```


There are two unique values in `Smoker` and two levels in `Sex`, for a total of four possible combinations of values: Female Nonsmoker (`Female_0`), Female Smoker (`Female_1`), Male Nonsmoker (`Male_0`), and Male Smoker (`Male_1`).

Specify the names for the columns in the output. 

```{matlab}
load('hospital');

dsa = hospital(:,{'Sex','Age','Weight','Smoker'});

statarray = grpstats(dsa,{'Sex','Smoker'},{'min','max'},...
          'DataVars','Weight','VarNames',{'Gender','Smoker',...
					'GroupCount','LowestWeight','HighestWeight'})
```


<!--------------------- EXAMPLE BREAK ------------------------->

## Summary Statistics for a Dataset Array Without Grouping

Load the sample data. 

```{matlab}
load('hospital');
```

The dataset array `hospital` has 100 observations and 7 variables. 

Create a dataset array with only the variables `Age`, `Weight`, and `Smoker`.

```{matlab}
load('hospital');

dsa = hospital(:,{'Age','Weight','Smoker'});
```

The variables `Age` and `Weight` have numeric values, and `Smoker` has logical values.

Compute the mean, minimum, and maximum for the numeric and logical arrays, `Age`, `Weight`, and `Smoker`, with no grouping.

```{matlab}
load('hospital');

dsa = hospital(:,{'Age','Weight','Smoker'});

statarray = grpstats(dsa,[],{'mean','min','max'})
```


The observation name `All` indicates that all observations in `dsa` were used to compute the summary statistics.



<!--------------------- EXAMPLE BREAK ------------------------->

## Group Means for a Matrix Using One or More Grouping Variables

Load the sample data. 

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')
```

All variables are measured for 100 cars. `Origin` is the country of origin for each car (France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Sweden, or USA). `Cylinders` has three unique values, `4`, `6`, and `8`, indicating the number of cylinders in each car.

Calculate the mean acceleration, grouped by country of origin. 

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

means = grpstats(Acceleration,Origin)
```


`means` is a 6-by-1 vector of mean accelerations, where each value corresponds to a country of origin.

Calculate the mean acceleration, grouped by both country of origin and number of cylinders. 

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

means = grpstats(Acceleration,{Origin,Cylinders})
```


There are 18 possible combinations of grouping variable values because `Origin` has 6 unique values and `Cylinders` has 3 unique values. Only 10 of the possible combinations appear in the data, so `means` is a 10-by-1 vector of group means corresponding to the observed combinations of values.

Return the group names along with the mean acceleration for each group. 

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

[means,grps] = grpstats(Acceleration,{Origin,Cylinders},{'mean','gname'})
```

The output `grps` shows the 10 observed combinations of grouping variable values. For example, the mean acceleration of 4-cylinder cars made in France is 18.05.


<!--------------------- EXAMPLE BREAK ------------------------->

## Multiple Summary Statistics for a Matrix Organized by Group

Load the sample data. 

```{matlab}
load carsmall
```

The variable `Acceleration` was measured for 100 cars. The variable `Origin` is the country of origin for each car (France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Sweden, or USA).

Return the minimum and maximum acceleration grouped by country of origin. 

```{matlab}
load carsmall

[grpMin,grpMax,grp] = grpstats(Acceleration,Origin,{'min','max','gname'})
```


The sample car with the lowest acceleration is made in the USA, and the sample car with the highest acceleration is made in Germany.


<!--------------------- EXAMPLE BREAK ------------------------->

## Plot Prediction Intervals for a New Observation in Each Group

Load the sample data. 

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')
```

The variable `Weight` was measured for 100 cars. The variable `Model_Year` has three unique values, `70`, `76`, and `82`, which correspond to model years 1970, 1976, and 1982.

Calculate the mean weight and 90% prediction intervals for each model year.

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

[means,pred,grp] = grpstats(Weight,Model_Year,...
                      {'mean','predci','gname'},'Alpha',0.1);
```

Plot error bars showing the mean weight and 90% prediction intervals, grouped by model year. Label the horizontal axis with the group names.

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

[means,pred,grp] = grpstats(Weight,Model_Year,...
                      {'mean','predci','gname'},'Alpha',0.1);

ngrps = length(grp); % Number of groups
errorbar((1:ngrps)',means,pred(:,2)-means)
xlim([0.5 3.5])
set(gca,'xtick',1:ngrps,'xticklabel',grp)
title('90% Prediction Intervals for Weight by Year')

fig2plotly(gcf);
```

<!--------------------- EXAMPLE BREAK ------------------------->

## Plot Group Means and Confidence Intervals

Load the sample data. 

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')
```

The variables `Acceleration` and `Weight` are the acceleration and weight values measured for 100 cars. The variable `Cylinders` is the number of cylinders in each car. The variable `Model_Year` has three unique values, `70`, `76`, and `82`, which correspond to model years 1970, 1976, and 1982.

Plot mean acceleration, grouped by `Cylinders`, with 95% confidence intervals.

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

grpstats(Acceleration,Cylinders,0.05)

fig2plotly(gcf);
```


The mean acceleration for cars with 8 cylinders is significantly lower than for cars with 4 or 6 cylinders. 

Plot mean acceleration and weight, grouped by `Cylinders`, and 95% confidence intervals. Scale the `Weight` values by 1000 so the means of `Weight` and `Acceleration` are the same order of magnitude.

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

grpstats([Acceleration,Weight/1000],Cylinders,0.05)

fig2plotly(gcf);
```

The average weight of cars increases with the number of cylinders, and the average acceleration decreases with the number of cylinders.

Plot mean acceleration, grouped by both `Cylinders` and `Model_Year`. Specify 95% confidence intervals. 

```{matlab}
load('carsmall')

grpstats(Acceleration,{Cylinders,Model_Year},0.05)

fig2plotly(gcf);
```

There are nine possible combinations of grouping variable values because there are three unique values in `Cylinders` and three unique values in `Model_Year`. The plot does not show 8-cylinder cars with model year 1982 because the data did not include this combination.

The mean acceleration of 8-cylinder cars made in 1976 is significantly larger than the mean acceleration of 8-cylinder cars made in 1970. 



<!--------------------- EXAMPLE BREAK ------------------------->

